Authentication for API usage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to use the **Encyclopedia API** service the user should
authenticate first to get a token.

The endpoint https://encyclopedia-api.nomad-coe.eu/v1.0/saml is used to
authenticate the user with the identity provider and to get acccess to a
token. ALWAYS a web browser should be used to access the mentioned URL.
The user will be redirected to IdP service provider where the login take
place. If the user doesnâ€™t have an account yet, a new one can be created
there, as well. After the user authentication with the IdP server is
succesfull, the browser will redirect to
https://encyclopedia-api.nomad-coe.eu/v1.0/saml/user/ where a few user
details, including the access token can be found.

Below there are a few screenshots which will guide you to the
authentication process:

Type the following URL in your browser:

https://encyclopedia-api.nomad-coe.eu/v1.0/saml

Here is the initial login window where the user can introduce their
credentials, use a guest account or register for a new user account if
you don't have one (for this tutorial you can just use the guest
account):

.. figure:: files/login.png
   :alt: login

The IdP server will store some information about the user and here the
user should agree:

.. figure:: files/information_release.png
   :alt: information release

After clicking "Accept" the new token is generated and send it to the
user:

.. figure:: files/token_api.png
   :alt: token\_api

The generated token will also have an expiration time embedded in it, it
**will expire after 24 hours**, so, a new token (new user
login/authentication) should be requested after this period of time.

After the user is authenticated with the IdP server and the token is
received, the token can be used to send requests to Encyclopedia API.

Before starting the tutorial, here is some information about how to
logout from our services:

-  in your browser type the following URL:
   https://encyclopedia-api.nomad-coe.eu/v1.0/saml/logout/ and you will
   get a page where you can confirm the logout:

.. figure:: files/logout_confirmation.png
   :alt: logout confirmation

-  after the logout is confirmed the user is logged out from NOMAD
   services:

.. figure:: files/logout_confirmed.png
   :alt: logout confirmed

After everybody knows how to login, get a new token and logout, here is
a new link wich will be really useful during our tutorial:

**Encyclopedia API Specifications/Documentation** is available here:
https://encyclopedia-doc.nomad-coe.eu/

The **Encyclopedia API URL** which we will use in our requests is
https://encyclopedia-api.nomad-coe.eu/v1.0/
